# Reading Notes

---

## Predictive Coding in the Visual Cortex: a Functional Interpretation of Some Extra-classical Receptive-field Effects — [Rajesh P. N. Rao, 1999]

**Date read: 09.06.2026**

**Link / DOI:10.1038/4580**

**Core idea in 2-3 sentences:**
 1. The approach postulates that neural networks learn the statistical regularities of the natural world, signaling deviations 
 from such regularities to higher processing centers.
 2. This reduces redundancy by removing the predictable, and hence redundant, components of the input signal.
 3. Using a hierarchical model of predictive coding, Rao et al. show that visual cortical neurons with extra-classical(unusual, different) RF properties can be interpreted as residual error detectors, signaling the difference between an input signal and its statistical predictionbased on an efficient internal model of natural images.
 4. Feedback connections carry predictions of expected neural activity from a higher hierarchical level to a lower one, while feedforward connections carry error between the predictions and the actual neural activity from lower to higher levels.
 5. Lower levels operate on smaller spatial and possibly temporal scales.
 6. Given an input image, the initial predictions at any given level are based on an arbitrary random combination of the basis vec-tors, giving large error signals. To minimize this error, the network converges to the responses that best predict the current input by subtracting the prediction from the input (via inhibition) and propagating the residual error signal to the neurons at the next level, which integrate this error and generate a better prediction (Methods)
 7. Input image example : Shorter bar in the center of the RF --> Large error signals, as short bars seldom occur in natural images, on which the model was trained. Longer bar extending to into the neighbouring RF --> necessary context for predicting bar in the center --> accurate prediction --> Lower magnitude of error.

**Key equations / mechanisms:**
onsider an image I represented as a
vector of n pixels. We assume that the cortex tries to represent the image
in terms of hypothetical causes, as represented by a vector r. We characterize
the relationship between the causes r and the image I using the
function f and a matrix U:

I = f (Ur) + n 


f (Ur) = f (∑Ujrj) 

Uj are columns of U, representing basis vectors for generating
images. Thus, each image I is assumed to be generated by a linear superposition
of the basis vectors followed by a possible nonlinearity f. In
terms of a neural network, the coefficients rj correspond to the activities
or firing rates of neurons, whereas the basis vectors Uj correspond to the
synaptic weights of neurons.

To make this model hierarchical, we assume that the causes r themselves
can be represented as a set of higher-level causes rh representing
more abstract stimulus properties than the lower level. This yields the
equation:
where rtd = f(Uh rh) is the ‘top-down’ prediction of r, and ntd is a stochastic
noise process.

OPTIMIZATION FUNCTION. The goal is to estimate, for each hierarchical
level, the coefficients r for a given image and, on a longer time scale, learn
appropriate basis vectors Uj for each hierarchical level. Assuming that
the noise terms n and ntd are Gaussian with zero mean and variances s2
and std
2 respectively, one can write the following optimization function:

E1 = (I – f (Ur))T (I – f (Ur)) + (r – rtd)T (r – rtd)

**How it connects to the project:**
Theoretical background for Predictive Coding models.


## [Paper Title] — [Author(s), Year]

**Date read:**

**Link / DOI:**

**Core idea in 2-3 sentences:**


## An Approximation of the Error Backpropagation Algorithm in a Predictive Coding Network with Local Hebbian Synaptic Plasticity — [Whittington, 2017]

**Date read:**

**Link / DOI:**

**Core idea in 2-3 sentences:**

**Key equations / mechanisms:**

**How it connects to the project:**

---
